Welcome to lecture 4 in our third week of
the course, Analysis of a Complex Kind. Today we'll learn about the complex
trigonometric functions, so the extensions to the complex plane
of the sine and cosine functions. We have already extended the exponential
function to the complex plane, so the question is can we do the same
thing for trigonometric functions? Now remember, e to the i theta
was our shorthand notation for cosine theta plus i sine theta. Therefore either -i theta or
you just replaced theta with minus theta, it's cosine of minus theta plus i
times the sine of minus theta, but cosine is a need function. These are just our regular viewed
value of cosine and sine functions. So that's cosine of theta but
sine as an odd function, so sine of -theta is -sine of theta. Now look at these two identities,
e to the i theta is cosine theta + i sine theta, e to the- i theta
is cosine theta- i sine theta. If I add these two things up, What I find is that e to the i theta + e to the-
i theta is simply two cosine thetas. The i sine theta part cancels out
because it has a plus sign here and a minus sign there. On the other hand, if I subtract
these two equations from each other, I find that e to i theta- e to
the -i theta is 2i sine theta, because now the cosines cancel out and
the sines don't. But these two equations that I just
obtained, I can solve them for cosine theta and
sine theta by simply dividing by 2 or 2i. And what I get is that cosine theta is e
to the i theta + e to the- i theta over 2 and sine theta is e to the i
theta- e to the -i theta over 2i. And this is for
the real value of cosine and sine. The idea is now,
well now that I can talk about e to the i anything, it doesn't have to
be just a theta, I could put a z there. Maybe I could just extend this definition
to the entire complex plane and that's exactly what we're going to do. The complex cosine and
sine functions are defined via cos z = e to the iz
+ e to the -iz over 2. And sine z is e to the iz
-e to the -iz over 2i. What is e to the iz, by the way? e to the iz, suppose z is x + iy, so that's e to the i(x+iy) that equals e to the ix + i squared y which is -y. So that will be e to the -y
which is our regular real-valued exponential
function times e to the ix. You could rewrite this as e to the -y cos x + i sin x. And now we have expressed e in the iz in
terms of purely real value functions. You could do the same thing for
e to the -iz. And so therefore cos z can be
expressed in terms of all real values, cosine, sine and exponential functions. And we'll do that later. Let's next learn about some properties of
the complex cosine and sine functions. In particular, we want to compare those
properties that we already know from real-valued analysis to those that we
can find for the complex equivalents. First of all sin z and
cos z are analytic functions because the exponential function's
an analytic function. The function z goes to iz is analytic,
and so you see a composition of those
two functions right here. We're adding another analytic function and
then dividing by 2, so by the rules of analytic functions, the
cosine function is an analytic function, and similarly,
the sine function is an analytic function. Since they're analytic in the entire
plane, they're, in fact, entire functions. For real-valued z, so if you plug
in a z of the form x with no iy, so just, z = x,
the complex sine function and cosine functions agree with
the real-valued sine and cosine functions. Because in that case I get cosine of z
= cosine of simply my x + i times 0. And that's e to the i x + e to the -ix /2, and that's the definition of our
real-valued cosine function. What's cosine of -z? For the real valued function,
the cosine function is an even function, cos of x is equal to the cos -x. Is that still true for
the complex cosine function? Well cos(-z) = e to the -iz + e to the iz. And I can just interchange these
two terms on top here because addition is communicative and
I see that this is equal to the cos z. Sin(-z) = e to the -iv, I'm just plugging in a -z for z up here. So e to the -iz,
minus e to the iz over 2i. I can't just interchange these two
terms because of this negative sign. So if I do interchange these two terms,
I get an additional negative sine. So sin(-z) is -sin z, just the same
thing is true in real valued analysis. s(-x) is equal to -sin(x). Sine function is an odd function,
it remains so in the complex extension. Furthermore, the addition properties for
the sine and cosine function still hold. cos(z+w) = cos z cos w- sin z sin w, and sin(z+w) = sin z cos w + cos z sin w, how would you prove such a thing? I'll show you an example. How would you prove that cos (z
+ w) = cos z cos w- sin z sin w? You would simply plug in the definitions
and simplify, let's do that. Let's start with the right-hand side,
in fact. cos z cos w- sin z sin w. Here I wrote down the expression for
cos z, e to iz + e to the- iz over 2. The same thing for cos w- sin z e
to the i z- e to the- i z over 2 i. And here I have sin w. I noticed when I multiply these
first two fractions with each other, the denominators multiply to 4. With the second two fractions,
the denominators are 2i times 2 i, which is -4 in the product. Together with this negative sign in front,
I can cancel the negative sign from the denominator and
make this negative sign into a plus. So the common denominator for
these Products of fractions is 4, and the numerators are e to
the i z plus e to the minus i z. That's from this term right there. Then e to the i w plus e to the minus i w. And now I have a plus, remember,
from the i squared and this negative sign. Then I have this term. And finally, this term. Now when I multiply through,
I get a lot of terms. We're not going to talk through
all of these terms, just trust me, these are all the terms you
get when you multiply through. For example,
e to the i z times e to the i w. E to the i z times e to the minus i w. And so forth. But if I look at these terms carefully,
I have e to the iz, e to the iw right here, and
there's another one right there. Together, that gives me 2 e to the i z,
e to the i w. I also have an e to the minus i z,
e to the minus i w here, and another one right there. Together that gives me two of these terms. The rest we get lucky. The rest actually cancels out. e to the i z times e to the- i w, and
here I have- e to the i z e to the- i w. So these two terms cancel out.. Similarly, e to the minus
i z e to the i w and minus e to the minus i z e to the i w,
so these two terms cancel out. So, everything simplifies. Now I have a 2 in the numerator,
a 4 in the denominator. I can cancel out one of those 2's. And make the denominator a 2 instead and end up by combining the exponents with e
to the i (z +w) + e to the -1 (z +w) / 2. But that's cosine ( z + w ). That's what I wanted to show. So, there's no ingenuity
in here in this proof. It's literally, flooding in
the definitions and simplifying. Lets look at some further properties. Remember the real valued consign
function is periodic with .2 pi. Is that still true for
the complex cosine function? Let's find out. What is cosine of (z + 2 pi)? I use the definition and
replace z with z + 2 pi. But what is e to the i times (z + 2 pi)? That is e to the i z times e to the i. Times 2 pi. But what is e to the 2 pi i,
that's equal to 1. So that's equal to e to the i z. In other words,
this first term is simply e to the i z. And similarly, the second term
is simply e to the minus i z. And so, I realize the cosine function
is also periodic with period 2 pi. And similarly the sine
function has the same period. Remember in real analysis, sine
squared x plus cos squared x equals 1? Well that is still through for
the new complex sine and cosine functions. sine squared z plus cosine
squared z equals 1. How would you prove that? It is actually a very simple proof. You substitute w = -z in
the addition formula for the cosine function,
let me simply demonstrate how to do that. The addition formula for
the cosine function was cosine of (z+w), what we're going to make that (z+-z),
and that's my w, is equal to the addition
formula set cosine z. Cosine W which is minus Z for me, minus sine Z, sine W, which is minus Z. Let's simplify both sides of the equation. Z plus minus Z, that's simply zero. So this side of the equation
becomes cosine of 0. But cosine of 0 is 1. On the right hand side, cosine of
minus z is the same as cosine of z. We showed that the cosine
function is an even function. So this is cosine z times cosine z,
which is cosine squared of z. On the other hand,
sine of minus z is, minus sine of z. So this minus sine can be pulled out and joins this minus sine in
order to give me a plus. All together sine square root of 2. So that's how simple it
is to prove that formula. Furthermore, sine (z + pi/2)
give us back the cos function just as it was the case with
the real valued functions. Again, it's very simple to prove. You look at sine (z + pi/2) and plug z + pi/2 into that
definition of the sine function. So wherever you see a z. Make it a z plus pi over 2, so sine of z
plus pi over 2, that equals e to the i, z plus pi over 2, minus e to the minus i,
z plus pi over 2, divided by 2i. What is e to the i, z plus pi over 2? Again, we can pull that apart,
as we did earlier. That is e to the i z times
e to the i pi over 2. What is e to the i pi over 2? e to the i pi over 2 equals i. So in other words,
this is i times e to the i z Similarly, the second term is minus i
times the minus i z because I have the, either the minus i prior
2 which is minus i. This simplifies because I have
an i in the denominator as well. See this i right here? This I in the denominator cancels
out with this I and that I. These two negative signs make a plus. I'm left with either the i z plus, either
the minus it over two which is cosine. What are the 0's of the sign function? We know the 0's of the real
valued sine function. The real valued sine function
looks something like this. You know it goes through the origin, And is equal to 0 at pi, 2 pi, 3 pi,
and so forth, negative pi. And so forth. Are there additional 0's, now that we have extended this
function to the complex plane? Let's find out. Remember, sine z is e to the i z
minus e to the minus i z, over 2i. If we want that to equal to 0, then we need the numerator of
this fraction to be equal to 0.. So, if e to the i z needs to
equal e to the minus i z. Remember we proved that e to the z is
equal to e to the w, if and only if z minus w is a multiple of pi i times 2. We proved this in our lecture
about the exponential function. So, e to the i z is equal to
e to the minus i z, if and only if their difference, in other words,
i z minus (-iz) is of the form 2 k pi i, for some k in the integers. But i z- (-i z), that's 2 i z. So 2i z needs to be equal to 2k pi i. I can cancel out a 2. I can cancel out an i and
this reads z needs to be of the form k pi. For k is an integer. Those are exactly the zeros
that we already knew of. So the sine function does
not gain any extra zeros by extending it to the complex plain. It's never going to be zero elsewhere,
only zero on the real axis. Similarly, we can show that the cosine
function is 0 only with the real valued cosine function was 0 namely at the points
pi over 2 + k pi where K is an integer. Now, we showed that the sine and cosine
functions are analytic functions, so they must have derivatives. What are these derivatives? The derivative of the sine function is
simply the derivative of e to the i z- e to the- i z over 2 i. 2 i is a constant that we multiply with,
it can go to the side. In other words, we only need to take
the derivative of the numerator. The numerator consists of two functions, each of which we can
differentiate separately. In other words we need
the derivative of either i z, and the derivative of e to the- i z. Let's look at the derivative
of e to the i z. We found the derivative in general
of a function e to the i x z. And found that was e times
the derivative of e to the i z. So in this case,
this is going to be i x e to the i z. That's right here. The derivative of either
the- i z is found similarly, we multiply with this constant
( -i ) e to the- i z. When we simplify we see there is
an i here, an i here, an i here, they all cancel out. Minus, minus gives me a plus. So I'm left with e to the i z + e to
the- i z over 2 which is cosine z. Just like it was the case for
the real value at sine and cosine functions,
the derivative of sine is cosine and similarly, the derivative
of cosine is negative sine. Finally, it is possible to express the
complex sine and cosine functions solely in terms of the real sine and the cosine,
and the real hyperbolic sine and cosine. Let me quickly show that to you. Sine z is sine of x plus i y. We could view this x + i y as
the sum of two complex numbers. One of those complex numbers is x,
the other one is i y. In other words, we are allowed to
use the addition formula here. So this becomes sine x cosine
i y + cosine x sine i y. What is cosine of i y? We need to plug in i y in
the cosine formula, and get e to the i x i y + e
to the- i times i y over 2. And then back here we do the same
thing with the sine function. E to the i times i y- you
have the- i x i y over 2 i. Let's see what we can simplify. I x i x y, that gives me a- y and
here i x i x y x -1 is just e to the y and
back here the same thing happens. If I rewrite this I find that
this first fraction is e to the y + e to the- y over 2. And the second fraction,
I have an i in the denominator. If I bring the i into the numerator,
1 over i is equal to- i. So I can bring that into the numerator
at the expense of a negative sign but I'm going to use that negative sign to
flip these two terms with each other. So I can now write e to the y- e to the-
y over 2 and then i here in the front. But now I'm left with sine of x,
this is the hyperbolic cosine function. Cosh y + i cosine of x x sinh of y. Or you could also leave it the way it
was in the previous line if you don't like to use cosh and sinh, and
having another way of actually evaluating sine of z, in terms of purely viewed
valued function, You need the sine of x, and the exponential function
in the cosine of x, and the exponential function of y and- y. Similarly, you can find that
cosine of z is cosine of x, cosh y,- i sine of x, sinh y. Next up are some amazing
properties of analytic functions. Here's an example. If f is an analytic function in
the domain, and you write it as real part + i x imaginary part, where u is the real
part, v is the imaginary part, and suppose the real part u is constant throughout the
domain, then f itself must be constant. There's no way to have
an analytic function where only the imaginary part varies. If the real part remains
constant the imaginary part has to remain constant as well. U and the imaginary part are not
independent of each other. They're tied together closely. And that's what gives analytic functions
some of their amazing properties This is what we're going to study
in the next lecture.