Welcome to lecture four in our
course analysis of a Complex Kind. Today we'll talk about
roots of complex numbers. You all know that
the square root of 9 is 3, or the square root of 4 is 2,
or the cubetrid of 27 is 3. But how would you take
a square root of 3+4i, for example, or the fifth root of -i. That's what we're going to
talk about today. Lets begins with a definition. Suppose w is a complex number. Then we say an nth root of w is another complex number z such that z to the n = w. So we'll see that if the number w is a root we're taking, is not = 0, and there are exactly n distinct nth roots. So there are two distinct
square roots of any number. There are three distinct cube roots and
so forth. And how do we see them? We use the polar form for
w and z to show this. So we'll write w as rho e to the i phi,
and z is re to the i theta. So you noticed we just introduced yet
another Greek symbol. Namely, the simply rho,
here for the radius. Because r is already used up for
the radius of z. Now, if we use these notations. Then z to the n equals w. That equation, that defining equation for
being an nth root. That equation becomes, if we write
instead of z re to the i theta. Then we get r to the n e to the i n theta. By the rules of how to
manipulate this e to the i theta is equal to w,
which is a rho to the i theta. So to compare these two complex
numbers and polar notation one or two numbers the same. They have the same distance from
the origin and were angles, degree modular to pi. So r to the n has to be equal to rho. And this angle and beta has to be talking about the same
angle that z is talking about. They can differ by 2 pi or by 4 pi, but
they can't differ much other than that. So m theta is pretty much the same as z, expect maybe for At 2k pi. So r to the n = rho, that means r
itself is the nth root of rho and since rho is just a positive
real number by nth root. When I write the symbol nth root I mean
the regular nth root that we all know. The regular nth root, not a complex root. Just the regular nth root of rho. And n theta has to be equal to phi
+ 2k pi where k is some integer. So I can divide this equation by n and I get theta a has to be phi over n
plus 2k pi over n and it turns out. If I look at the values of K from 0,1 and
so forth to n-1 I have
exhausted all possibilities. After that, things start repeating. So these are actually distinct roots, and if I look at k equals n for
example when k = m. What would I get? I would get theta = fi over n plus 2, in our case = n. 2 n pi divided by n that
N would cancel out so I would have phi over n plus 2 pi. But I already looked at the angle theta
equals phi over n 1k was equal to 0. So I would get kind of the same angle
as the one I got when k was equal to 0. And so, I don't get any new angle. I'm getting different angles here for
k equals 0 through n minus 1 and then the angles start repeating. And so, I get all my different
solutions as w to the 1 over n. This is how I denote my
solutions is = to the nth root of ro times etha i,
fi over n plus 2 k pi over n. Where k runs through the values 0,
1 all the way to n minus 1. So these are the nth roots of w and
there all these things from each of. One special root is
the principal nth root of w. It's the one that we obtain when we
choose the principal argument of w for pe and k equals zero. So here again I wrote down
this formula we just found. If W is of the form rho e to the I Phi,
then the nth roots of W can be found with this formula,
for these n values of k. So let's find the square
root of 4i as an example. So first of all 4i, we need to bring that into this form,
in the form rho e to the I phi. So we have to figure out what's rho,
what's phi. 4i is 4 times instead of i
we can write e to the i pi over 2 we discovered that
during the last lecture. And so in other words, this row is 4. And phi and a possibility for
the angle phi pi over 2, and we wanted to take this square
root of the second root. So n is 2. So now we have everything we
need to plug in this formula. So we find 4i to the one-half is equal to the square root of 4, times e to the i. Now we need to take phi and
divide it by n. Phi is pi over 2, divided by n. That gives me pi over 4. Plus, 2 k pi over n. We'll just write that down. 2 k pi over 2 because my n is 2. So here's the complete formula, and
we need to plug in k = 0, and then k = 1. So we get two separate solutions. For k = 0, this whole second term
2 k pi over 2 which is not there. And so, we find square root of 4 which
is 2 times e to the i, pi over 4. That's one of my two square roots,
and when k's equal to 1, 2k pi over 2 becomes 2
pi over 2 which is pi. So I get 2 times either
the i pi over 4 plus pi, but remember what e to the i pi equals? Pi is a 180 degree angle. E to the i pi, is this number right here. That forms a 180 degree angle. That's a number minus 1. So, since I can pull this exponent apart. e to the i pi over 4 plus pi is actually
the same as minus e to i pi over 4. So the second solution is the same as the
first solution except for a negative sign. So these two are actually
the same except a negative. So plus or minus, and
remember what e to the i pi over four was? We also looked at that during
the last lecture e to the i of pi over four was this number on the unit
circle at a 45 degree angle. And we found that was root over two
over two plus i times root 2 over 2. If I multiply that number by two
it becomes root 2 plus i over 2. So root two plus i over two. I see that right here,
and with a plus or minus. Plus for the k equals zero solution,
minus for the k equals one solution. So in the picture, I'm drawing a lot
of pictures here all over the place. The square roots of four i,
where are they? Four i is kind of far up on the Y axis, i is here. The square root of 4i are at distance 2. So on the circle radius 2. And at a 45 degree angle. That's one of the square roots,
and the other one is over here. So these are the two square roots of 4i. And in coordinates, they are plus or
minus root two plus i root two. Let's do the same thing for
the cubed roots of -8. First step again,
we have to write -8 in polar form. For it's just not minus eight
because the polar form has to have a positive radius right here. While the radius of minus eight,
the norm of minus eight is eight. And the minus sign you get that
by writing e to the i pie. So eight times e to the i pie,
that's the polar form of minus eight. So in other words,
this row is equal to eight. And phi the angle is pi. And you want to take the cubed roots,
so my n is 3. Again now, I have everything I need
to plug in to this equation and I can go ahead and do that. So the cubed roots of 8
can be found by taking the regular cubed root of 8 This
is just one cubed over eight, the one for eight being a positive number,
so that's actually two. This number right here, that's simply two, because two cubed is eight
times e to the i, phi over n. Phi is pi, n is three. So I get a pi over three right there. Plus two k phi over answer,
two k phi over three. And now I need to consider k equals zero,
one and two because I'm taking the cubed root. So let's start with k equals zero. So this whole second term is in
there when k is equal to zero and assumed to get two times e
of the i phi over three. When k's equal to 1,
the second term becomes 2 pi over 3. So I have pi over 3 plus 2 pi over 3. Well, that's 3 pi over 3, or simply pi. k = 1 my root becomes 2 to the e ipa 1, but remember e to the i pi is negative 1. So the second solution is negative 2, and
indeed if you check that negative 2 cubed. What's negative 2 cubed? Well negative 2 cubed
is negative 8 indeed. And the third solution is 2
times e to the i pi over 3 and now we have to plugin k verse 2. So 4 pi over 3 but pi over 3 is
4 pi over 3 that's pi pi over 3. So this is the third
solution that we find. Let's turn to our picture where
we find where this solutions are. So -8 is somewhere way down
here on the negative x axis, and we want to find
the cubed roots of eight. So they're all on
the circle of radius two. So there's four and there's two. So here is the circle of radius two
all cubed roots of radius two and one of them is at at angle pi over three. One of them is an angle pi and
then we said angle five pi over three. So here's the angle pi, and
there is phi over three and there is phi, phi over three. So these are the cubed roots of -8. Just a quick other definition,
the nth roots of the number 1. Those are called the nth roots of unity,
because 1 is going to be unity. So what do those look like? Well the number 1 is in polar form,
1 times e the i times 0, so angle 0. So if we plot that into our formula. We get the nth root of 1 is
the regular nth root of 1, which is just 1,
times e to the i phi over n. Phi is 0, so 0 over n plus 2k pi over n,
and k runs from 0 through n minus 1. So replacing the nth root of 1 here. Just with a number 1,
I get e to the i to k pi over n. So these are the nth roots of unity. And again, let's draw a picture
to understand what they are. So this time 1 I'm going to draw that right here and let me draw
the circle of radius one right here. So this is the circle of radius one and
I want to find the nth roots of one. And they're all of radius one and
their angles are 2 pi k over n. So for example, for
the eighth roots of one I need to find the angle 2 pi over 8. This is 2 pi over 2,
coz that's pi 2 pi over 4. So 2 pi over 8 will be here. 2 times 2 pi over 8, 3 times 2 pi over 8,
4 times 2 pi over 8, 5 times 2 pi over 8, 7 times 2 pi over
8 And this is 0 times 2 pi over 8. So I have these equally spaced
points on unit circle that correspond to the 8th roots of unity. I simply divide the whole angle
into as many parts as necessary and that gives me the nth roots of unity.