Welcome back to Lecture 3 in
our second week of our course, Analysis of a Complex Kind. Today we'll learn about iteration
of quadratic polynomials, and finally we'll learn about Julia sets. So, we'll be looking at polynomials
of the form f(z) = z^2 + c, where c is a constant that
is in the complex plane. And we wanna study how these
functions behave under iteration. How that behavior depends
on this constant c. Let me remind you what
we mean by iteration. We're gonna look at f of f of z and f of f of f(z) and so forth, and
we had short-hand notations. We called this f2 and this was f3 and
we'll look at f4 and f5, and we'll make the sequence go on and on and
on and look at higher and higher iterates. And we wanna understand how
the behavior of the iterates depends on the constant, c. Now you're gonna ask what about
other quadratic polynomials? Why just z^2 + c? Shouldn't we be more generally
looking at p(z) = az^2 + bz + d? That's what the general
quadratic polynomial looks like. Well it turns out, for
each polynomial az^2 + bz + d, you can actually find exactly
one polynomial of the form z^2 + c that behaves
the same under iteration. So there's a special constant
c that depends on a, b and d, so that these two
polynomials behave the same. So what do we mean by that and
why is that true? Well it turns out they're
conjugate to each other, what that means is the following. So given a,b and d,
to form one of these polynomials up here, we can let c be a x d+ b
over 2- d/2 quantity^2. Then you can find this function phi,
which is just a linear function. a x z + b/2. And it turns out that p
of z is the same as phi inverse of (f(phi(Z))). So what exactly does that mean? We have a complex plane right here and
we have p acting there. And that maps the complex plane
to some other complex plane. On the other hand,
we have this function phi. So this function phi. We're going to draw there here, and it maps that complex plane
to some other complex plane. Phi.
And we'll draw the same picture right here. Maps the complex plane to
some other complex plane. And down here we have the function f. And if we choose the constant c correctly we can follow a point
in two different ways. If you start with the point z up
here you can find p of z we're just plugging that point
into the function p or you trace it down here
by first applying phi. So here's phi of z in
the orange coordinate system. Then applying f to get over here. So now down here you have f(phi(z)). And then going back up with
the inverse of this function, phi. So p(z) is phi inverse of f(phi(z)). That's what it means for p and f to be conjugate to each other
under the following function phi. Again, we had p of z is phi
inverse of f of Phi of z. f is this nice function. f of z is z^2 + c. p is a more general quadratic polynomial. So, why is that useful? Short-hand, we all write p is = phi
inverse composed with f composed with phi. That's really what this means. Here's the miracle that
happens integration. Let's look at p composed with p. This is the kind of function
you'd want to look at if you look at the integration of p. Well p itself is phi inverse
composed with f composed with phi. And the second p is also phi inverse
composed with f composed with phi. And what you'll notice what happens,
there's a phi from the first function, and then there's a phi inverse in the second
function that clash right into each other. But a function that's inverse under
composition, they cancel each other out. So you can get rid of these two middle
terms, and this simplifies to phi inwards composed with f, composed with f,
composed with phi. So, in other words, the second iterate
of p can be found by taking the second iterate of f and conjugating it with phi. Similarly, the third iterate of p is the
third iterate of f conjugated by phi and so forth. If we wanted to understand
behavior under a duration of p, we might just as well understand
behavior under the duration of f. And then just conjugate that,
to get back to p. And therefore,
it suffices to study the duration of quadratic polynomials of this
more simpler form z^2 + C. The Julia set is named after
the French mathematician Gaston Julia who lived 1893 to 1978. And it is defined to be the set of
all those points z in the convex plane for which the behavior of
the iterates is chaotic in a neighborhood. We'll have to define what that means. So for a fixed c, we fix a c and f(z)= z² + c we define all those z's
that we can plug into this function so that the iterates behave chaotically,
and we'll define what that means. The Fatou set of this function is
named after the French mathematician Pierre Fatou, who lived 1878 to 1929,
and is the set of those z for which the iterates
behave normally in a neighborhood. These two sets are kind of
opposites of each other. The Julia set is the set where
the iterates behave chaotically, the Fatou set is the set where
things are pretty normal. What does that mean? When we say the iterates
behave normally near z we mean that nearby points remain
nearby under iteration. Suppose you have one point and
another one that's near by, and we want to track what happens to
these points on their iteration. So where does this point
get mapped under f? And where does this one
get mapped under f? So suppose this one goes here,
and then it goes here. You keep applying f so
maybe next time it goes here, and then maybe the next time
it goes there, and so forth. Now the iterates behaving normally means
that a point that used to be nearby kind of remains nearby. So when you track this
point under iteration, it doesn't behave very
differently from the pink point. Their orbits stay nearby under iteration
as the pink orbit moves up there, the green one kind of falls along. They can vary a little bit, but
they kind of staying nearby to each other. That's what it means to behave normally. On the other hand,
behaving chaotically near a point means we start somewhere and you can find
points nearby, like one here and maybe one over here that do completely
different things from each other. So that one goes there, and
this one goes over here. And in the next step this one goes there,
and this one goes here. So they behave totally
differently from each other. And if you can find points like that
in any ever so small neighborhood of the original point, then we say that
point is a locus of chaotic behavior. This is best understood in some examples. Let's look at c = 0. So that means that
the quadratic polynomial we want to understand is f(z) = z squared. We already know what the iterates are, we
calculated that in the previous lecture. The nth iteration of f is fn(z) = z(2nth). If we write z in polar
form as re to the i theta, we see that fn(z) is then r to the n
times e(i times 2 to the n theta). And so we can understand quite simply
what happens under iteration here. If z is less than one,
then the absolute value of fn of z, which is just r to the 2 to the n. And if r is less than one, r to the 2
to the n is a sequence of complex numbers that converges to
0 as n goes to infinity. And so by one of our facts about
convergence of complex numbers, this implies that fn of z goes
to 0 as n goes to infinity. So if you draw the circle of radius one,
if you were to pick a point inside the circle under
iteration, you know, it might move around. But eventually,
it's gonna hone in on the origin. It's gonna get closer and
closer to the origin. So it's gonna spiral its
way toward the origin. And that is true for
any point that you start with. So if you start with this point. It'll also eventually get closer and
closer to the origin. On the other hand, if z is greater than
one, so if you have a point out here, then fn(z), which is z2n, and z is now a number bigger
than one, if you raise a number bigger than one to higher and higher powers,
that number goes off to infinity, and so we say that fn(z) goes to
infinity as n goes to infinity. This might be happening like this. The radius gets larger and larger and
eventually we're going off to infinity. Finally, if the norm of these equal to 1. So if you start with a point that lies
on the unit circle, like this one right there, then z is just of the form e
to the i theta, because r is equal to 1. If fn of z is equal to e
to the i 2 to the n theta. And so the norm of fn of z is 1 for all n. So it's just gonna rotate around and
around, depending on what the value of n and
theta. So this is just gonna keep
going around here, and stay on this circle of radius one. However, what happens to nearby points? We notice that in any little disk
around a point, Of norm one. There are points w whose norm
is bigger than one, and so for which the iterations go off to infinity. And other points w whose absolute
value is less than one, and for which the iterates go to zero. Let me draw a picture to
make this entirely clear. Here's that circle of radius one. And let's pick a point on that circle. Then any small neighborhood around
that point contains points inside. Those points will want to go to zero,
and it contains points outside. And those points go off to
infinity under iteration, and so even very nearby points behave
very differently under iteration. The ones inside go to 0. The ones outside go off to infinity. Therefore, we say the unit circle, so
the orange 1, the circle of radius 1, is the locus of chaotic behavior for
the integration of this function. Whereas those z's whose opposite
values are bigger than 1. But, the iterates
are attracted to infinity and those z's where the absolute
value of c is less than 1 where the iterates are attracted to 0,
form the locus of normal behavior. Because no matter where you are, you can
find points nearby that behave the same. They also go off to infinity and
they walk off to infinity together or inside here,
they both go to zero together. We write that Julia set is the set of all
z whose absolute value is equal to 1 and the Fatou set is all those z's
whose absolute value is bigger 1, Union whose absent value is less than one. More generally now let's look
at f of z = z squared plus c. The set of all those z's that are attracted to infinity under
iteration gets a special name. It is called the basin of
attraction to infinity. And we call it A of infinity, so
it consists of all those z's for which the iterates go off to infinity. In the previous example that was
the outside of the unit circle. Here's a theorem,
this set A of infinity, the base and the protraction to infinity,
is an open connected and unbounded set. It is a part of the Fatou set of f. The Julia set coincides with the boundary
of this basin of attraction to infinity, and that boundary is a closed and
bounded subset of C. What did that theorem just tell us? It said the Julia set is a closed and
a bounded set. The Fatou set is open and unbounded and
contains the set A of infinity. And it's also true that the Julia set and
Fatou set have absolutely nothing in common with each other and both sets
are completely invariant under f. That means that when you take
a point in the Julia set and map it with f, it remains in a Julia set. You take a point in the Fatou set and map
it with f, it remains in the Fatou set. Let's look at another example. Let's look at f(z) = z-squared- 2. It's pretty hard to calculate and
understand the iterates of this function. Let's just get started. If you try to calculate f(f(z)),
it already gets pretty complicated. That is f(z squared -2). And the function f takes whatever
argument you stick in there and squares it and then subtracts 2. So it gets really
complicated rather quickly. It's gonna be hard to understand
the iterates by looking at them this way. But there's a trick. We can conjugate again. We're gonna conjugate f with the function
phi(w) given by w + 1 over w. So let's try to understand what that does. Phi maps the outside of the unit disc to C minus the closed interval from -2 to 2. Let's draw a picture. Here's the unit disk. And this function, phi, takes a point and
adds to it its reciprocal, we claim takes the outside of this unit disk and
maps it to the whole complex plane. The only exception
the interval from -2 to 2. So this is the only excluded parts, it maps it everywhere but
this interval from -2 to 2. How is that useful? We want to conjugate f with this function. So we want to look at phi inverse
composed with f composed with phi. So let's draw another picture. Here's again the outside
of the unit circle. And that can be mapped with phi to
the outside of this interval from -2 to 2. Now it turns out the function f
maps the outside of the interval from minus two to two, to the outside
of the interval from minus two to two. You can check this quite easily. If you plug in some real numbers for
example, then you see that the interval for -2 is mapped to itself onto
the front of x squared- 2. For example, if you plug in 2,
you get 4- 2 which is 2. If you plug in -2, you also get 2. If you plug in 0 you get -2. So you get a pretty quick idea that
this function maps the interval from -2 to 2 to the interval from -2 to 2. Everything that's not in that interval
to everything that's not in the. So if you apply the function f here. It maps it to the outside
of that interval again. Now that means, once we applied phi here. We can then apply phi inverse. Phi maps the outside of the unit
circle to the outside of the interval. If we apply f, we're still on
the outside of the interval, so we are allowed to apply phi inverse. And get back to the outside
of the unit circle. If we follow a point out here under phi
that point might get mapped over here, under f it might end up over here, and
then under phi inverse maybe over here. And we can then also look at the shortcut. So what did this point really do? How did this point move by going with phi,
with f, and then with phi inverse? This function over here is the function
phi inverse composed with f, composed with phi. And it turns out that function is much
easier to look at than the function f. Let's see what that function is. F of z was z squared- 2. Phi was the function w + 1 over w. And we were trying to understand what
is phi inverse of f of phi of w. We'll calculate it. Here is f of phi of w. So, we'll start by just calculating
this inside part, f of phi of w. We take the function f and
we stick phi(W) in for z. So that's (phi(W) quantity squared- 2. But phi(W) is W + 1 over W so
we end up with W + 1 over W squared- 2. Let's multiply through. This gives us w squared + 1 over w squared plus 2 times w times 1 over w,
and there's the- 2. We notice that 2 times w times 1 over w,
the w's cancel out. So this is a 2 and there's another 2. So this whole term goes away. So we are left with W
squared + 1 over W squared, which is actually phi of W squared. So f(phi(w)) = phi(w squared) and that means we can just bring this phi
to the other side of the equation. Phi inverse of f of phi of w is w squared. This function that we're interested
in the shortcut is a real shortcut. It's the function w squared
which we already understand. Let me draw that picture for you again. We understood that the outside of the unit circle gets snapped under the function phi to the outside of
the interval from -2 to 2. F takes the outside of
the n over -2 to 2 and maps it to the outside of the integral for
-2 to 2. And we would like to understand
how exactly it does that and what it does under iteration. Phi inverse still maps the outside. Of the interval for
-2 to 2 to the outside of the unit circle. And we were looking at
the shortcut over here. And that shortcut is the function
g of w is equal to w squared. If you start with a point w out here and
trace it through. Here's phi of w,
then down here somewhere is f of phi of w. And then back here, this point
becomes phi inverse of f of phi of w. And, we just showed that it's the same
thing as simply saying w squared. So, when we conjugate
the function f that we want to understand with this function phi. We end up with a function
g of w equals w squared, which we already understand
under iteration. So here's our situation. F of z, z squared- 2,
phi is this function w + 1 over w, and we just calculated that phi inverse
of f of phi of w is just w squared. Or, if you wanted to solve that for f, we
bring the two phis onto the other side of the equation so, bring the phi
inverse here and bring that over here. Then you get that phi of g of
phi inverse of z is f(z) and g is that function of z squared. So on the outside of the interval
from minus to the 2, the function f that we want to understand,
behaves exactly like the function g behaves on
the outside of the closed unit disk. But, on the outside of the closed
unit disk, the iterates of the function g just go to infinity. That's part of the Fatou set. And so, therefore we can conclude that
the outside of the interval from -2 to 2 is part of the Fatou set for
the function f and is actually the set that gets
attracted to infinity under f and therefore A of infinity the base
of attraction of infinity for the function f is everything but
the closed integral from -2 to 2. Since we know that the boundary of
this set gives us the Julia set, we know the Julia set is
the closed interval from -2 to 2. We have looked at two examples so
far, and found their Julia sets. We looked at f(z) = z squared, and found the Julia set is the unit circle,
and we looked at z squared- 2, and we found the Julia set is the closed
interval from -2 to 2 on the real axis. Turns out, these two examples are rather exceptional
in that their Julia sets are smooth. The unit circle is such a nice, smooth curve, the interval for
-2 to 2 is a smooth line. It has no wiggly-ness and
then no crinkles. It turns out they are the the only
examples amongst all z squared + c with smooth Julia sets. So c = 2 and c = -2 are the only
parameters that give us smooth Julia sets. Here are some more pictures
of other Julia sets and we'll learn how to create
these during the next lecture. [MUSIC]