Welcome to the second lecture in our
course Analysis of a Complex Kind. Today we'll be talking about algebra and
geometry in the complex plane. We'll learn what the complex numbers are,
how to add them, how to multiply them, how to subtract and
divide them, and some of their properties. Complex numbers are simply
expressions of the form z = x + iy, where x and y are simply real numbers. For example, z = 3 + i * 5 would be a complex number. Often that is just written as 3 + 5i, so it doesn't really matter if
the i comes before or after. x, this first number right here, is called the real part because there's
no i attached to it, whereas y, the second number with the i in front
of it, is called the imaginary part. Or, in short, x is Re of z,
the real part of z, and y is Im of z, the imaginary part of z. The set of all complex numbers is
denoted by a C, for complex plane. This is like a C with a double bar in it. It's a regular C with an extra bar in it. That's the mathematical symbol for
the complex plane. The real numbers are considered
a subset of the complex numbers, those for which that second parameter,
that y, is simply equal to 0. So a number of the form z = x +
0i is considered a real number. And so the real numbers are kind
of subsets of the complex numbers. So our regular numbers, 3, 6, 7, they're
all included in the complex numbers. The complex plane can be identified
with R2, and here's how that goes. We often draw an actual plane,
so a coordinate system. And we use the x-axis for the x
coordinate, which is the real part of z. And we use the y-axis for
the imaginary part of z. And with that convention, we can then draw a complex number z which
is of the form x + iy, where the coordinates
are here the x coordinate, the real part of z, and the y coordinate, that's the imaginary part of z. And thereby, the real numbers
are actually sitting on that x-axis. The numbers on the y-axis are called
purely imaginary numbers. Now how do we add complex numbers? Suppose we have a number z which
is of the form x + iy, and we have a second number
w of the form u + iv. How do we add them? So here we're defining
the addition of complex numbers. We're defining them by simply adding
the two numbers that don't have any i's attached to them, so the x and the u. We add those two numbers, and
so those two real numbers. And then we add the y and
the v and put the i in front. And so our new complex number, our
resulting complex number has a real part, which is the sum of the two real parts,
and has an imaginary part, which is the sum of
the two imaginary parts. In other words, the real part
of z + w is simply the real part of z plus the real part of w, and
the imaginary part of z + w is simply the imaginary part of z
plus the imaginary part of w. Let me give you an example. Suppose we were adding the numbers (3 + 5i) + (-1 + 2i). The way to do that would
be simply to add the 3 and the -1, 3 + -1 = 2. And then add the 5 and
the 2, and that's a 7i. Graphically, the addition of two complex numbers could be
represented as a vector addition. So let's go back to our coordinate system. Suppose we have a vector z right here. I'll draw it as a vector even though it's
really a point in the complex plane. And suppose we have a second vector w,
which would be right here. So that's u + iv. If we wanted to add these two vectors,
all we would have to do is we move the beginning of
z to the end of w and sort of complete this parallelogram
that you can see right here. And the vector in the middle,
the diagonal vector, that corresponds to the vector z + w. So this point right here is z + w,
and what we've done there, we have indeed added the x of z and
the u of w. So from here to here, that distance is
exactly the same as from here to here, which corresponds to the length u. And on the other hand,
the same is true on the y-axis. So addition of complex numbers
corresponds to a vector addition. The modulus of a complex number is the
distance of that number from the origin, or the length of the vector
from the origin to the point z. So again, if I draw my complex plane, and suppose I have a point z = x + iy. And this is the x coordinate and
here's the y coordinate. And suppose I'm asking,
how far is z from the origin? So I'm asking for this length right there. How long is that? And I'm going to call that
the modulus of z, that length. Well, I can see there's
a right triangle right here. And in order to find the length of
the hypotenuse in that right triangle, all I need to do is I square
the lengths of the two legs. But how long are those legs? This leg right here has length x squared,
well, that's the square of this leg. This leg has length y, and so y squared. And together that gives me the length
of the hypotenuse squared. So z squared is x squared plus y squared,
or in other words, z itself is the square
root of x squared plus y squared. Now how do we multiply complex numbers? Here's the motivation. Let's pretend for
a second that they behave just like normal numbers that we know
from elementary school. So suppose I have number x + iy and
I wanted to multiply that with u + iv. And suppose all the regular rules held, so I can just distribute this
out the way I'm used to. Then I would get x times
u by multiplying this number with this number,
plus ixv, from here. And then I get iyu And an i squared yv. So, we get exactly these four terms. Now, if i indeed has the property
that i squared is -1, then this should really just be a -1 here. Now, this is a motivation, so
this is the thought that goes into this following definition. If this is supposed to be true,
then the part of this number that is revealed will consist of this
xu because there's no i in there, and this number right here, because i² is -1,
so -yv is also a real number. So, the real part of the product of these
complex numbers should be xu, -yv and the imaginary part would
be this together with this. So, xv + yu, and indeed that's
how we define our multiplication. So, let's look at an example. Suppose we wanted to
multiply 3 + 4i by -1 + 7i, so what I have to do
according to this formula, I have to take the x and
multiply it with the u that gives me a -3. Then, I have to take the y, just the 4, multiply it by v, and put a negative
sign in front of the products. So, 4 times 7 is 28, -28, then I'm
going to get the complex part by taking x and multiplying it with v. So, 3 times 7 that's this 21. And finally, I take y times u. So, this is y and u is here. So, 4 times -1 is -4. Then, I simplify ( -3- 28 ) is -31 and
(21- 4) is 17. So, the result of this product is again
a complex number, and it is -31 + 17i. Now, one can check that
with this definition the usual properties of
multiplication still hold, even though we're now multiplying complex
numbers and not just real numbers. And those are, for example that z1 times
z2 times z3, if you want to multiply three numbers, it doesn't matter
if you multiply the first and the second first, then, take the result
and multiply it by the third or, you multiply the second and the third and
then, the first one times that result. This is called Associativity,
you can move these blank piece around and decide which multiplication
get's executed first. Multiplication is also communitive
which means it doesn't matter if I write this factor first and this factor,
or if I write this the other way around. So in fact, this would be the same
thing as (-1 + 7i) (3 + 4i). You should check this out. Get out a piece of paper and apply this formula to this product and
verify that, indeed, you do get the same result,
-31 + 17i. Finally, our multiplication
is distributed. So, if I have three complex numbers and
I have to multiply Z1 by the sum of Z2 and Z3, I could also multiply this out and
multiply Z1 and Z2 and multiply Z1 and
Z3, and add them up. That's called the Distributive Law,
and all of these laws still hold. Now, what exactly is i, that number i? So far, it's kind of just a symbol
that's been sitting there. Well, i is certainly the same as 0 + 1i. And so,
I can now calculate i squared because i is 0 plus 1 times i and
the other i is also 0 plus 1 times i and I can use the rule of multiplication that
answers to find to find out what this is. So, according to my rule of
multiplication, I have to take this 0 and that 0 and multiply them and
that gives me this number right here, then I have to take this one. And that one, multiply them and
put a negative sign in front of it. That's, what I get right there. Then, I have to take this 0,
and that 1, and multiply them. And finally, I have to take this 1, and that 0, and multiply them, and these
two form the imaginary part together. So, 0 minus 1 is -1,
and all the rest is 0. So, i squared is indeed -1. So the multiplication we define has
the property that we wanted it to have, i squared=-1. So, what is i cubed? Well, i cubed is i squared time i by
the associativity we just realized, it doesn't matter which one i
multiply first, i squared is -1. So, i cubed is -1 times i, so it's -i. I to the 4th? Well, I could write that as
i squared times i squared. Each of these i squared,
as we just showed, is -1. So that's -1 times -1, and -1. What's i to the 5th? Well, that's i to the 4th times i. I to the 4th we just showed as 1,
so it's 1 times i, which is just i. I to the 6,
well that is i to the 5th times i. I to the 5th was i, i squared is -1. And it keeps going, so
what have we noticed? I is i, i squared to the- 1,
i cubed is- 1 before this 1. And then,
these four numbers keep repeating. So i, i squared is -1, i cubed is- i, i to the 4th is 1, i to the 5th is i,
Iito the 6th is -1, i to the 7th is negative i, i to the 8th is 1 and
it keeps repeating like that. So, there's really just four different
states that power of i can have. So, how do you divide complex numbers? Suppose we're given a z = x + i y and
a w = u + i v, so two complex numbers. How do I divide z by w? And of course I'm going to need w
to be non 0, I can't divide by 0. So, here's a great trick and
I'll show that to you with actual numbers. Z over w would be x plus
i y over u plus i v. Let's do this whole calculation
with actual numbers. Suppose z is 3 plus 4 1 and so, suppose w is -1 + 7i and
I wanted to calculate this quotient. So, I wanted to calculate 3 + 4i and divide that by -1 + 7i. How do I do that? What the idea is to multiply top and bottom by this number u-iv, so
almost the same as the bottom but I'm multiplying it by the bottom number
with the plus replaced by a minus. So, in our example here I would have still my top (3 + 4i) / -1 + 7i, but now, I would multiply top and bottom by- 1- 7 i. So, it's always the same at the bottom. But I'm replacing this plus
here with a negative sign. Now, when I multiply this out, on top I have a regular
multiplication of two complex numbers. So I'm going to get here, 3 times -1. It's -3 Then 4 times negative
7 is negative 28, but I'm going to have to make it a plus, because
that's how the multiplication goes. And then plus i times, and I need to
multiply the 3 by the negative 7, so that's negative 21, and
the 4 by the negative 1, so minus 4. And what happens in the denominator? I have a U squared plus V squared. So I'm just going to
multiply this through here. Negative one times negative one is one. And I have a seven times
times a negative seven. That's negative 49, but
I'm going to make that a plus, so plus 49. And then I get + i times negative
1 times negative 7, that's 7. And 7 times negative 1 is negative 7. And now see what happened. So on top I have in this example here,
28 minus 3, so that's 25. Plus i times and
here I have minus 20 minus 4 is minus 25. And my denominator, I have a 50 and
the imaginary part went away. And so in other words,
this simplifies to a complex number. I have no more i's in the denominator. And so I can simplify this 25
divided by 50, simply one half plus i times and
here I have a minus one half. It could have pulled the minus sign
out and put it right here, but this looks exactly like
our complex numbers look. In other words, when I divide complex numbers,
the result is again a complex number. And the trick we used was to
make the denominator real. And how did we do that? We make the denominator real by
multiplying the denominator (u + iv) by (u- iv). We also multiply the numerator by that so
that we would have equality. So we just multiply top and
bottom by (u- iv) but the trick was that that made
the imaginary part cancel out. And so the denominator became purely real,
so that we could then separate real and imaginary part of the result. So here's the result. It's a formula for
the quotient of two complex numbers. In particular, if we just wanted to
calculate 1 over z, so not z over w, but just 1 over a complex number is 1 / x +
iy and again we would do the same thing. We would multiple top and
bottom by x- iy and if we do that and the bottom the imaginary
parts would cancel out and we would just end up with
x squared + y squared. That's unless, of course, z is not 0. So, 0 plus 0i would be i. Couldn't be dividing by that. That this is 1/z. So this quantity x- iy were we just
replaced the plus with the minus, that was really important in
the previous calculation. It is so
important that we give it a special name. So if z equals x + iy is a complex number,
then we call that complex number would be replaced the plus
with a minus the complex conjugate of z. And it's denoted with a z with a bar
on top of it, do you see that here? So zbar is the complex conjugate of z. So let's look at some of its properties. If you conjugate twice,
you end up with the original number. If you take the conjugate
here which is X- iy. And you take another conjugate of that, all you do is you flip the sign in
front of the imaginary product. You're going to end up with x minus
-iy and minus and minus is plus, so that's x + iy and we're back to
the original number we started with. So taking the conjugate twice,
gets you back to where you started. What does taking the conjugate
mean graphically? Let's go back to our coordinate system. And that's supposed to have a complex
number z right here Which is x plus iy. Then where is the complex
number x minus iy? Right here's x, and there's y. When I'm going to retain the x for
the complex conjugate, but I'm making the y negative,
I'm taking -y instead of y. And so in other words,
I'm going to get this number right there for
the complex conjugate = x-iy. So the complex conjugate is the number z,
but it's reflected with respect to the x-axis. Now here's a property of complex numbers. If I take the complex conjugate
of a sum of two complex numbers, I might just as well take the conjugate
of z first and then the conjugate of w, and then add those two numbers up. It's a property one easily verifies. The absolute value of the conjugate is
the same as the absolute value of Z. We can kind of see that in my picture,
right here. But this length right there is
the length of Z and down here is the length of the conjugate of Z and
because this is just a reflection of that. These, of course, have the same length. Large as you see, in my picture. But because this is a reflection
they have the same length. Now here's a really neat property. Z times its conjugate. That's what we were making off in
the calculation of the quotient This x plus iy times x minus iy. When I multiply through,
I get x times x, which is x squared. I get y times minus y,
which is minus y squared, but together with a negative sign that I
get from the i squared, so plus y squared. And I get x times minus iy,
and x times plus iy. That cancels out. So, I get x squared plus y squared. Which is their length of z squared? So z times its conjugate is
actually the length of z squared. And that means we can lead
by the formula for 1 over z. 1 over z now becomes, multiply the top and
bottom by z conjugate. So z times z conjugate, and
in the numerator of z conjugate and the denominator simplifies
to length of z squared, so 1 over z is the conjugate of z
divided by the length of z squared. Now when is it the case that
the conjugate of the number is equal to the number itself? We learned that the conjugate is simply
a reflection with respect to the x axis. So when is the reflection with respect to
the x axis the same as the number itself. So when is this number equal
to its own reflection? Only if the number was on
the real axis to begin with. So this is the case if. Z is a real number. Now here's another
interesting thing to note. If you add a number and its complex conjugate, what you end
up doing is (x + iy) + (x- iy). So you add the x and
the x, you get 2x, and then you add the complex parts, the iy and
the -iy, they cancel each other out. So you get something real. In other words if I divide this equation
by two I get the x which is the real part of z. Is equal to Z plus its conjugate over two. So we find a nice formula for
finding the real part of a complex number. We add the number to its conjugate. And similarly if you
take a complex number and subtract the conjugate then you get
two I times the imaginary part. So if you want the imaginary
part by itself, without the I,
you're going to have to divide by 2i. So this is also a nice formula. Now you can verify that the length of
z times w is the length of z times length of w. So length in multiplication behave
well with respect to each other. You can also verify that the conjugate of Z over W is the conjugate of
Z over the conjugate of W. And finally that the length of Z is zero,
if and only if Z was zero. Now this is pretty easily verified,
because the length of Z, remember. Let's look at the square of the length. That's just x squared, plus y squared. And, x square plus y square,
when is that equal to zero? These are two real numbers. One cannot be zero. They both have to be zero. So this is zero, if, and only if, x is equal to zero, and, y = 0. And that means if and only if
the number z itself was the number 0. Now we have some inequalities
that are really helpful. One of them is pretty obvious
by looking at a picture. Let me draw the complex plane right here. And there's a complex
number Z right there. Then this is the real part of Z,
this length right there. It's the real part of Z. Whereas this length right here
is the normal, the length of z. And this length right there
is the imaginary part of z. So this is the real part of z and
that's the imaginary part of z, and since they form a triangle I see that this
length here is certainly greater than or equal to either one of those two lengths. And that's what's expressed here. The real part of z is less than or equal to the absolute value of z and
the same is true for the imaginary part. And because that's true in
absolute value we get the other inequality easily as well. An inequality that's also very
nice is the triangle inequality. The length of z plus w is bounded above
by the length of z plus the length of W. Now let me show you in
a picture why that is the case. So let's add two complex numbers, z and w. So remember how we do that? We do a vector additions, here is z and
suppose we wanted to add to that w. Then what we have to do,
we have to complete this parallelogram. And this is our point |z+w|. And it can be represented
by this diagonal. This is the length of |z+w|. And if I look over here, this length here that was the length of z,
and here I see the length of w. Because it's the same vector
as this one down there. And again these form a triangle, my triangle didn't really
meet very nicely over here. These three lengths form a triangle and the shortest path from the origin to
z+w is certainly this diagonal and the slightly longer path is to go
along z first and then along w. So z+w is greater than or
equal to the direct path z+w. That's what the triangle inequality says. There's a reverse triangle inequality that
follows from the triangle inequality. It's |z- w| is greater than or equal to
|z|- |w|, won't go into much detail there. Finally, a little outlook into the future. This is the fundamental theorem of
algebra, you may have heard of it. Suppose we have complex numbers a0,
a1 through an, and this an, this last one,
is a nonzero number. If you look at this polynomial,
so for example, if you'd like to have an example in mind, you could look up the polynomial
p of z equals 5 z cubed plus 4 z squared minus 2 z plus 14. So in this case, 3 would be
the largest n that we have here, so a3 would be 5, a2 is 4,
a1 is negative 2, and z0 is 14. So this is called a degree 3 polynomial,
and this theorem says that such
a polynomial has n roots. So in this case it has three
roots in Cs of 3 ps for which p of z can be equal to 0. And it can be factored as
an times Z minus the first group, Z minus the second group and so forth. We'll be able to prove this
theorem later on in this course. Now, in R this was totally not true. This is a special fact
about complex numbers. For example,
look at polynomial p (x) = x squared + 1. So we have a degree two polynomial,
but we're only considering it for real numbers and not for complex numbers. This never, even crosses the x axis. So, if I graph this polynomial x squared
plus one is always above the x axis. It never crosses the x axis, so
it's never equal to zero and so we can't factor it either,
it has no real roots. But, if you looked at that
as a polynomial in C. So z squared + 1 instead of x squared + 1,
and we're allowed to not only plug in real numbers for
the x, but also complex numbers. Then I can find two complex numbers,
namely i and negative i, for which this term right here
is actually equal to 0. i squared plus 1 is 0 and
minus i squared plus 1 is also zero. [INAUDIBLE] And so it actually factors. So this is a theorem
about complex numbers and we will be able to prove this later on
using complex analysis in this course.